\documentclass[../catalog.tex]{subfiles}

\begin{document}

Within an attribute-oriented data model, relational joins cannot be
treated as scary, exceptional operations, but must rather be viewed as
commonplace, everyday tools. Even the most basic aggregation of data —
obtaining a consistent view of domain entities over time — requires
joining potentially many attributes. Robustly maintaining high-arity
joins for many concurrent users with low-latency and high-throughput
is therefore the defining problem of the 3DF architecture.

Join operators must maintain state to buffer inputs on either side,
until matching inputs from the other side arrive (and vice versa) or
the epoch closes. Systems like Kafka Streams enforce sliding,
fixed-size window semantics (\cite{kafkadocs}) to bound the state
maintained by a join operator. Differential Dataflow maintains such
state in arrangements (c.f. chapter \ref{background-differential})
that are compacted as the computation makes progress (i.e. epochs are
completed). Differential's \texttt{join} operator will therefore
arrange both of its input collections on the join variables, should
they not already be available in arranged form.

For higher-arity joins this becomes problematic, because the output of
the first two-way join will be fed as an input into the second two-way
join, and so on. At each stage along the spine (except for the very
last), intermediate join results will therefore be maintained in
arranged form. This is illustrated in
\autoref{fig:join-at-a-time-plan}.

\begin{figure}[h!]
  \includegraphics[width=1.0\linewidth]{diagrams/join-at-a-time}
  \caption{Join At A Time}
  \label{fig:join-at-a-time-plan}

  \medskip
  \small

  An exemplary three-way joiin implemented via a join-at-a-time
  plan. Base relations are in green and are shared across all
  queries. Arrangements in red hold intermediate join state, are
  created on-the-fly, and not shared with other dataflows.
\end{figure}

Depending on the selectivity of the various join stages, this can lead
to significant space overheads. Worse, in our continuous query
processing setting, erroneously estimating intermediate cardinalities
will therefore cause disastrous complexity in both time \emph{and}
space.

\subsection{Example}

Intermediate join state becomes especially apparent in star-joins
along highly correlated columns, e.g. one-to-one relations with very
similar cardinalities and low selectivity. Unfortunately this is a
very common use case in our attribute-oriented data model. Consider
the following query.

\begin{verbatim}
[:find ?person
 :where
 [?person :person/firstname _]
 [?person :person/lastname _]
 [?person :person/gender _]
 [?person :person/birthday _]
 [?person :person/creation-date _]
 [?person :person/ip _]
 [?person :person/browser _]]
\end{verbatim}

This query requires a seven-way join on all person ids, aggregating
seven different person attributes back into an aggregate view. Within
the LDBC dataset, every person carries all seven of these
attributes. Therefore all relations are of the same size and map
one-to-one from person ids to the associated values. Because of this,
implementing this query as six consecutive two-way joins leads to a
five-fold increase in the number of tuples maintained by this
dataflow, \emph{independent of the chosen join order}.

We encounter an even more pronounced version of this problem, when
looking at sub-graph queries, such as the triangle search:

\begin{verbatim}
[:find ?a ?b ?c
 :where
 [?a :person/knows ?b]
 [?b :person/knows ?c]
 [?a :person/knows ?c]]
\end{verbatim}

Here the attributes do not have a one-to-one correspondence anymore (a
few celebrities might have in-degrees in the millions, whereas most
people are in mutual friendship with a few hundreds) and join order
becomes crucially important.

\subsection{Remedy}

Adapting the incremental join view techniques from
\cite{blakeley1986efficiently}, we can break up our queries along
their potential sources of change
(c.f. \autoref{fig:delta-query-plan}). In our example, any of the
comment attributes may change arbitrarily, which means we will end up
with six separate queries.

\begin{figure}[h!]
  \includegraphics[width=1.0\linewidth]{diagrams/delta-queries}
  \caption{Delta Queries}
  \label{fig:delta-query-plan}

  \medskip
  \small
  
  An exemplary three-way join implemented via delta-queries. Three
  independent dataflows are required, each handling changes to a
  specific base relation. These delta sources are stateless.
\end{figure}

What is different about the resulting plans, is that, given an indexed
representation of all attributes, they can be implemented in an
otherwise stateless manner. They do not need to maintain intermediate
arrangements as was the case for the traditional join operator. This
allows us to decouple the memory use of our join processing from the
number of active queries and the complexity of the joins, and instead
bound it in the number and size of attributes maintained. There is a
trade-off of course, as transforming plans into delta queries leads to
an increase in the number of dataflow elements.

Within any given delta flow, an attribute may only appear at a
position where either of its sides is already bound by the tuples
flowing through it, in order to avoid having to produce the entire
relation for each incoming tuple. We therefore would want to keep
attributes indexed in both directions (from entity id to value and the
other way around), to increase the number of possible plans available
to us.

Another subtle issue, identified in \cite{dogsdogsdogs}, arises when
implementing delta queries within the dataflow model. Simultaneous
updates to multiple of the participating attributes can lead to
redundant derivations of the same result tuple. We must be careful to
impose a logical order on the execution. This implementation detail is
described later in \autoref{impl-altneu}.

\subsection{Evaluation}

We show that joins of arbitrary arity implemented with delta queries
maintain no intermediate tuples in addition base relations, whereas
the same joins implemented as join-at-a-time plans store intermediate
tuples proportional to the size of the base relations and the arity of
the join.

Using the LDBC (\cite{erling2015ldbc}) data generators we generated a
dataset simulating the social network activity of ~10,000 persons. On
this we ran subsets of the above conjunctive query on attributes of
persons, increasing the number of clauses participating in the join
with each run. These runs were performed with the dataset fully loaded
into 3DF and without streaming updates.

During each run we measured the number of tuples maintained across
arrangements within the query dataflow. Differential provides event
streams containing information about the logical size of
arrangements. From those events, the number of tuples within an
arrangement is easily inferred. Implementation details of the logging
instrumentation are covered in \autoref{logging}.

\begin{figure}[h!]
  \begin{subfigure}{1.0\textwidth}
    \includegraphics[width=1.0\linewidth]{results/join-state/out/tuples_join}
    \caption{Join-at-a-Time}
  \end{subfigure}
  \begin{subfigure}{1.0\textwidth}
    \includegraphics[width=1.0\linewidth]{results/join-state/out/tuples_delta}
    \caption{Delta Queries}
  \end{subfigure}

  \caption{Total Number of Tuples in Arrangements}
  \label{fig:tuple-counts}
\end{figure}

Figure \ref{fig:tuple-counts} shows the total number of arranged
tuples after each join produced initial results. As expected, we see
that the number of arranged intermediate tuples grows with as more
attributes participate in a consecutive two-way join, whereas it
remains constant when using delta queries.

\begin{figure}[h!]
  \includegraphics[width=1.0\linewidth]{results/join-state/out/all_cdfs}
  \caption{Latency CCDFS}
  \label{fig:arity-latencies}
\end{figure}

Delta queries allow us to trade dataflow size in return for a
predictable memory footprint, and without affecting latencies
significantly. Considering only selections, projections, and n-way
joins, the overall system could be configured to use only memory
proportional to the number and size of the base relations. No
additional operator state is required, independent of the number of
queries and the arity of the joins within them.

Additionally, delta queries decouple space from time complexity. Using
traditional tree joins, a sub-optimal join plan incurs both a heavy
computational cost as well as space overheads, due to the sheer number
of intermediate tuples materialized and maintained in
arrangements. Delta queries would still have to spend time processing
large numbers of tuples, but without the need to index them.

While we must take measures to keep the overall size of the dataflow
manageable (as will be the topic of
\autoref{case-redundant-dataflows}), we conclude that delta queries
are a powerful technique in many common scenarios.

\end{document}
